# 20220822T13:05

***Introduction to Materials Characterization***

We are focusing first on optical and electron microscopy at the beginning of the semester.

***What do you see?***

There are many ways to visualize information from your specimen. The objective of this course is to inform whether or not data presented in work is well-based or not well-founded based on the visual information given.

***Putting it in perspective***

The way a material is analyzed greatly changes the inferences contained therein, and certain techniques or equipments are better suited to glean certain information based on the material. We could see a change at the performance level without a change at the chemistry level. This relationship may be seen in the CPSPP sequence.

*[CPSPP]: CPSPP: Chemistry, Process, Structure, Property, Performance

***Topics this semester***

- Light Microscopy
- Scanning Electron Microscopy
- X-ray Spectroscopy
- Transmission Electron Microscopy
- X-ray Diffractometry
- Thermal Analysis
- Scanning Probe Microscopy
- Electron Spectroscopy

!!! summary Project 1
    - Incorporate a variety of characterization methods applied to common objects
    - The analysis will follow a distinct path and be the same for everyone
    - The work will be done in a group, but each member must be able to…

***Summary***

Characterization adds information, but it does not answer questions without interpretation. Knowing what to look for is half the battle. Figuring out what it looks like and what it means is the rest. There are numerous ways to “look” as a material, and they are often complimentary. Choosing the right combination of techniques will get the most pertinent information with least effort and cost. Not knowing the options…