# Resolution

***Objectives***

- consider the practical performance metrics.
    

***Light diffraction***

light passing through an aperture will be diffracted.
the interference pattern created will produce an Airy disk through a round opening.
The distribution of light intensity will result a broadening of a point and unavoidable overlap between nearby points.

***Resolution limit***

resolution is the smallest distance between two points at which they are both distinctly visible.
The Airy disks should not severely overlap, or the two points will appear as one.
The Rayleigh criterion states that two points are just resolved when the center of the Airy disk generated by one point coincides with the first zero of the Airy disk generated by the second point: $R = \frac{d}{2} \approx \frac{0.61\lambda}{\mu\sin(\alpha)}$.

***Numerical aperture***

the numerical aperture (NA) is the gathering ability of the lens and related to the angle acceptance of incoming light: $NA = \mu\sin(\alpha)$.
Resolution is wavelength dependent, with visible light having a 400nm minimum.
For better resolution, oil immersion (n=1.5) can be used.
Why? A: the oil keeps the diffraction down at the boundary of the lens.
What is the maximum resolution of light? at alpha = 1, which would be within the lens itself.
typically, NA = 1.5 at blue light.
M=1000 is the limit of what your human eye can see in an optical microscope.
Any better magnification is better for computer analysis.

***Brightness***

magnification does not produce a good image on its own.
the image formed can be described in terms of its appearance, and is related to the magnification and NA.
Brightness is the intensity of light.
Transmission: (NA)^@/M^2; reflection (NA)^4/M^2.
At high M, the brightness drops rapidly, so a high NA is important.

***Contrast***

The ability to discern features on a distinction of feature boundaries.
the contrast is the difference in light intensity between an object and its background.
visibility requires a contrast threshold, and depends on brightness: bright light, contrast can be as as 3%; dim light, contrast must be as much as 200% or more.

***Depth of field***

Df is the range of position over which the sharpness of an object does not change.
Outside this range, the object is out of focus.
since light is diffraction limited.
the resolution will not change across some range of distance.
note that R and Df are proportional (high resolution will have a small Df): $D_{f} = \frac{d}{\tan(\alpha)} = \frac{2R}{\tan(\alpha)} = \frac{1.22\lambda}{\mu\sin(\alpha)\tan(\alpha)}$.

***depth of field and depth of focus***

one way to increase depth of field is to decrease alpha.
this simultaneous reduces the resolution.
features of a significant zheight may benefit from increased Df but only if large enough to sufficiently resolve.
The depth of field is the distance from the lens to the object, and the depth of focus is the range of positions at which the detector or eye sees the object as in focus at a single object position (M^@ times larger than Df).

***Aberrations***

light is not focused at a single point, even under the best circumstances.
there are numerous contributing factors to the imperfections (aberrations).
some of these issues…

***Field of view aberrations***

chromatic aberrations occur because the wavelength of light determine show the light refracts: shorter wavelength refract more strongly (high refractive index).
Spherical aberrations is caused by the lens curvature, where the off-axis rays are focused differently than the near axis rays.

***off-axis aberrations***

astigmatism is caused by light rays being focused differently when passing through the horizontal axis versus the vertical axis: caused by lens asymmetry, a circle will appear elliptical.
Curvature of field occurs when a focal plane is not planar, but concave (if the detector is planar).

***Summary***

- Light microscopy is versatile and capable, but the use of visible light has real limitations.
- getting an image and getting a good image are very different
- the sources of error are linked to fundamental physical principals and imperfections in design and manufacture.
- knowing the sources of error can help in determine proper use of the optical microscope.